---
date: 2021-01-08 13:00:00
title: "Séminaire virtuel: vendredi 8 janvier 2021"
summary: "[Thomas E.  Gorochowski](https://research-information.bris.ac.uk/en/persons/thomas-e-gorochowski) (University of Bristol, UK) et [Olivier Borkowski](https://research.pasteur.fr/fr/member/olivier-borkowski) (Inria and Institut Pasteur)"
categories: "Séminaires"
---

### 13h00 - 13h30 -- Thomas E. Gorochowski (University of Bristol, UK)

**Using diverse sequencing technologies to accelerate genetic circuit design**

Synthetic genetic circuits are composed of many
interconnected parts that must function together in concert to implement
desired biological computations. A major challenge when developing new
circuits is that genetic parts often display unexpected changes in their
performance when used in new ways. Such changes can arise due to
contextual effects or unintended interactions with the host cell. In
this talk, I will demonstrate how we have been using a variety of
sequencing technologies to tackle problem. First, I will show how
RNA-sequencing can be used to measure the function of every
transcriptional part making up large genetic circuits. This enables us
to better understand why some designs fail and helps pinpoint the root
cause. Then, I will present some recent work where we combined
RNA-sequencing with ribosome profiling and RNA spike-in standards to
enable the first large-scale characterization of transcriptional and
translational parts in absolute units. Finally, I will discuss some new
work that uses long-read nanopore sequencing to enable the
characterization of thousands of genetic parts simultaneously to better
understand their design constraints. Taken together, the methods
presented provide a means for a more complete and quantitative view of
the inner workings of genetic circuits and improves our understanding of
the rules governing the effective construction of larger and more
complex biological systems.

### 13h30 - 14h00 -- Olivier Borkowski (Inria and Institut Pasteur)

**A large-scale exploration of cell-free compositions to maximize protein production using active learning**

Lysate-based cell-free systems have become a major platform
to study gene expression but batch-to-batch variation makes protein
production difficult to predict. We described an active learning
approach to explore a combinatorial space of \~4,000,000 cell-free
compositions, maximizing protein production and identifying critical
parameters involved in cell-free productivity. We also provided a
one-step-method to achieve high quality predictions for protein
production using minimal experimental effort regardless of the lysate
quality. Eventually, we challenged our method with a collection of E.
coli cell-free systems using various homemade cell lysates and lysates
supplemented with antibiotics to alter the efficiency of transcription
and translation processes.\
Joint work with Mathilde Koch, Agnès Zettor, Amir Pandi, Angelo Cardoso
Batista, Paul Soudier, and Jean-Loup Faulon at Génomique Métabolique,
Genoscope, and Micalis Institute, INRAE, France

