---
date: 2021-03-12 13:00:00
title: "Séminaire virtuel: vendredi 12 mars 2021"
summary: "[Samuel Chaffron](http://pagesperso.ls2n.fr/~chaffron-s) (Combi team, LS2N, Nantes) et [Stéphanie Chevalier](https://www.lri.fr/~schevalier) (LRI, Paris-Saclay)"
categories: "Séminaires"
---

### 13h00 - 13h30 -- Samuel Chaffron (Combi team, LS2N, Nantes)

**Environmental vulnerability of the global ocean plankton community
interactome.**

[slides](chaffron_samuel.pdf)

Marine plankton form complex communities of interacting organisms at the
base of the food web, which sustain oceanic biogeochemical cycles, and
help regulate climate. Though global surveys are starting to reveal
ecological drivers underlying planktonic community structure, and
predicted climate change responses, it is unclear how community-scale
species interactions will be affected by climate change. Here we
leveraged Tara Oceans sampling to infer a global ocean cross-domain
plankton co-occurrence network -- the community interactome -- and used
niche modeling to assess its vulnerabilities to environmental change.
Globally, this revealed a plankton interactome self-organized
latitudinally into marine biomes (Trades, Westerlies, Polar), and more
connected poleward. Integrated niche modeling revealed biome-specific
community interactome responses to environmental change, and forecasted
most affected lineages for each community. These results provide
baseline approaches to assess community structure and organismal
interactions under climate scenarios, while identifying plausible
plankton bioindicators for ocean monitoring of climate change.

### 13h30 - 14h00 -- Stéphanie Chevalier (Lifeware / Inria Saclay)

**Synthesis of Boolean networks from single-cell differentiation
data.**

Processes like cell differentiation and cancerisation have dynamical
properties around the notion of trajectory (succession of changes in
gene state), non-reachability (bifurcating event) and stability
(differentiated cell). Single-cell data on such behaviors are now quite
widely available but dynamical modelling with them remains too complex
to be commonly leveraged. I will present the approach we develop to
automatically infer dynamical models from such data and prior knowledge
on gene interactions. The inference method consists in formulating the
inference as a Boolean satisfiability problem, described as a logic
program containing both the modelling formalism (Most Permissive Boolean
network - MPBN) and the data on the biological process (prior knowledge,
experimental measurements, dynamics, hypotheses). Several constraints
have been implemented in Answer-Set Programming to ensure the desired
dynamical properties, and thanks to this logic modeling it is now
possible to exhaustively enumerate the MPBN compatible with the
constraints of cell differentiation behaviors. In order to leverage
single-cell data, I firstly run classification and trajectory
reconstruction methods, then data are translated into logical form to
describe the cells dynamics. I will present preliminary results obtained
for a large-scale modeling of hematopoiesis from cell-scale
transcriptomic sequencing data (single-cell RNA-seq data). Potential
influences between genes and proteins are extracted from the SIGNOR
database, which brings more than 5500 components (genes, proteins and
complexes).
